Documentation/gfx/libgfxinit.md, before:

libgfxinit - Native Graphics Initialization
===========================================

Introduction and Current State in coreboot
------------------------------------------

*libgfxinit* is a library of full-featured graphics initialization
(aka. modesetting) drivers. It's implemented in SPARK (a subset of
Ada with formal verification features). While not restricted to in
any way, it currently only supports Intel's integrated gfx control-
lers (GMA).

Currently, it supports the Intel Core i3/i5/i7 processor line and
will support HDMI and DP on the Atom successor Apollo Lake. At the
time of writing, Sandy Bridge, Ivy Bridge, and Haswell are veri-
fied to work within *coreboot*.

GMA: Framebuffer Configuration
------------------------------

*coreboot* supports two different framebuffer setups. The default
enables the legacy VGA plane in textmode. Due to legacy hardware
constraints, only the first found display is enabled in this mode.
(cf. `src/drivers/intel/gma/text_fb/gma.adb`).

The second option sets up a high-resolution framebuffer with the
native resolution of the display if only one is detected, or the
smallest of all resolutions (per dimension) if multiple displays
are detected. This option is selected by
`CONFIG_FRAMEBUFFER_KEEP_VESA_MODE`.
(cf. `src/drivers/intel/gma/hires_fb/gma.adb`).

In any case, a smaller framebuffer is up-scaled to each display's
native resolution while keeping aspect ratio.

GMA: Hook-up in Chipset Initialization
--------------------------------------

Both configurations described above implement a procedure
`GMA.gfxinit()`:

    procedure gfxinit (lightup_ok : out int);

This procedure is exported as the C function `gma_gfxinit()` as
follows:

    void gma_gfxinit(int *lightup_ok);

* `lightup_ok`: returns whether the initialization succeeded `1` or
                failed `0`. Currently, only the case that no display
                could be found counts as failure. A failure at a la-
                ter stage (e.g. failure to train a DP) is not propa-
                gated.

GMA: Per Board Configuration
----------------------------

There are a few Kconfig symbols to consider. To indicate that a
board can initialize graphics through *libgfxinit*:

    select MAINBOARD_HAS_LIBGFXINIT

Internal ports share some hardware blocks (e.g. backlight, panel
power sequencer). Therefore, each board has to select either eDP
or LVDS as the internal port, if any:

    select GFX_GMA_INTERNAL_IS_EDP	# the default, or
    select GFX_GMA_INTERNAL_IS_LVDS

Boards with a DVI-I connector share the DDC (I2C) pins for both
analog and digital displays. In this case, *libgfxinit* needs to
know through which interface the EDID can be queried:

    select GFX_GMA_ANALOG_I2C_HDMI_B	# or
    select GFX_GMA_ANALOG_I2C_HDMI_C	# or
    select GFX_GMA_ANALOG_I2C_HDMI_D

Beside Kconfig options, *libgfxinit* needs to know which ports are
implemented on a board and should be probed for displays. Each
board has to implement the package `GMA.Mainboard` with a list:

    ports : HW.GFX.GMA.Display_Probing.Port_List;

or a function returning such a list:

    function ports return HW.GFX.GMA.Display_Probing.Port_List;

You can select from the following Ports:

    type Port_Type is
      (Disabled,	-- optionally terminates the list
       Internal,	-- either eDP or LVDS as selected in Kconfig
       DP1,
       DP2,
       DP3,
       HDMI1,		-- also DVI-D, or HDMI over DP++
       HDMI2,
       HDMI3,
       Analog);		-- legacy VGA port, or analog part of DVI-I

Each `DPx` and `HDMIx` pair share pins. If they are exposed as DP
ports, they are usually DP++ (aka. dual-mode DP) ports that can
also output HDMI signals through passive adapters. In this case,
both DPx and HDMIx should be listed.

A good example is the mainboard Kontron/KTQM77, it features two
DP++ ports (DP2/HDMI2, DP3/HDMI3), one DVI-I port (HDMI1/Analog),
eDP and LVDS. Due to the constraints mentioned above, only one of
eDP and LVDS can be enabled. It defines `ports` as follows:

    ports : constant Port_List :=
      (DP2,
       DP3,
       HDMI1,
       HDMI2,
       HDMI3,
       Analog,
       Internal,
       others => Disabled);

The `GMA.gfxinit()` procedure probes for display EDIDs in the
given order until all available pipes are taken. That's 1 pipe
in VGA textmode, 2 pipes in high-resolution mode until Sandy
Bridge, 3 pipes from Ivy Bridge on.

Commit message:

UPSTREAM: Documentation/gfx: explain port mapping in libgfxinit's config
BUG=none
BRANCH=none
TEST=none

Change-Id: I0ac7bef5053ec993fe495837e9ff0ce157aad1c2
Signed-off-by: Patrick Georgi <pgeorgi@google.com>
Original-Commit-Id: 6f9c84dc88fc4fcc351ec91b2bb9ff5ae6e4f1a6
Original-Change-Id: Id24ded4ba641aade66468313e33ede1a82090f05
Original-Signed-off-by: Stefan Tauner <stefan.tauner@gmx.at>
Original-Reviewed-on: https://review.coreboot.org/27854
Original-Tested-by: build bot (Jenkins) <no-reply@coreboot.org>
Original-Reviewed-by: Paul Menzel <paulepanter@users.sourceforge.net>
Original-Reviewed-by: Patrick Georgi <pgeorgi@google.com>
Reviewed-on: https://chromium-review.googlesource.com/1174372
Commit-Ready: Patrick Georgi <pgeorgi@chromium.org>
Tested-by: Patrick Georgi <pgeorgi@chromium.org>
Reviewed-by: Patrick Georgi <pgeorgi@chromium.org>

Documentation/gfx/libgfxinit.md, after:

libgfxinit - Native Graphics Initialization
===========================================

Introduction and Current State in coreboot
------------------------------------------

*libgfxinit* is a library of full-featured graphics initialization
(aka. modesetting) drivers. It's implemented in SPARK (a subset of
Ada with formal verification features). While not restricted to in
any way, it currently only supports Intel's integrated gfx control-
lers (GMA).

Currently, it supports the Intel Core i3/i5/i7 processor line and
will support HDMI and DP on the Atom successor Apollo Lake. At the
time of writing, Sandy Bridge, Ivy Bridge, and Haswell are veri-
fied to work within *coreboot*.

GMA: Framebuffer Configuration
------------------------------

*coreboot* supports two different framebuffer setups. The default
enables the legacy VGA plane in textmode. Due to legacy hardware
constraints, only the first found display is enabled in this mode.
(cf. `src/drivers/intel/gma/text_fb/gma.adb`).

The second option sets up a high-resolution framebuffer with the
native resolution of the display if only one is detected, or the
smallest of all resolutions (per dimension) if multiple displays
are detected. This option is selected by
`CONFIG_FRAMEBUFFER_KEEP_VESA_MODE`.
(cf. `src/drivers/intel/gma/hires_fb/gma.adb`).

In any case, a smaller framebuffer is up-scaled to each display's
native resolution while keeping aspect ratio.

GMA: Hook-up in Chipset Initialization
--------------------------------------

Both configurations described above implement a procedure
`GMA.gfxinit()`:

    procedure gfxinit (lightup_ok : out int);

This procedure is exported as the C function `gma_gfxinit()` as
follows:

    void gma_gfxinit(int *lightup_ok);

* `lightup_ok`: returns whether the initialization succeeded `1` or
                failed `0`. Currently, only the case that no display
                could be found counts as failure. A failure at a la-
                ter stage (e.g. failure to train a DP) is not propa-
                gated.

GMA: Per Board Configuration
----------------------------

There are a few Kconfig symbols to consider. To indicate that a
board can initialize graphics through *libgfxinit*:

    select MAINBOARD_HAS_LIBGFXINIT

Internal ports share some hardware blocks (e.g. backlight, panel
power sequencer). Therefore, each board has to select either eDP
or LVDS as the internal port, if any:

    select GFX_GMA_INTERNAL_IS_EDP	# the default, or
    select GFX_GMA_INTERNAL_IS_LVDS

Boards with a DVI-I connector share the DDC (I2C) pins for both
analog and digital displays. In this case, *libgfxinit* needs to
know through which interface the EDID can be queried:

    select GFX_GMA_ANALOG_I2C_HDMI_B	# or
    select GFX_GMA_ANALOG_I2C_HDMI_C	# or
    select GFX_GMA_ANALOG_I2C_HDMI_D

Beside Kconfig options, *libgfxinit* needs to know which ports are
implemented on a board and should be probed for displays. The mapping
between the physical ports and these entries depends on the hardware
implementation and can be recovered by testing or studying the output
of `intelvbttool` or `intel_vbt_decode`.
Each board has to implement the package `GMA.Mainboard` with a list:

    ports : HW.GFX.GMA.Display_Probing.Port_List;

or a function returning such a list:

    function ports return HW.GFX.GMA.Display_Probing.Port_List;

You can select from the following Ports:

    type Port_Type is
      (Disabled,	-- optionally terminates the list
       Internal,	-- either eDP or LVDS as selected in Kconfig
       DP1,
       DP2,
       DP3,
       HDMI1,		-- also DVI-D, or HDMI over DP++
       HDMI2,
       HDMI3,
       Analog);		-- legacy VGA port, or analog part of DVI-I

Each `DPx` and `HDMIx` pair share pins. If they are exposed as DP
ports, they are usually DP++ (aka. dual-mode DP) ports that can
also output HDMI signals through passive adapters. In this case,
both DPx and HDMIx should be listed.

A good example is the mainboard Kontron/KTQM77, it features two
DP++ ports (DP2/HDMI2, DP3/HDMI3), one DVI-I port (HDMI1/Analog),
eDP and LVDS. Due to the constraints mentioned above, only one of
eDP and LVDS can be enabled. It defines `ports` as follows:

    ports : constant Port_List :=
      (DP2,
       DP3,
       HDMI1,
       HDMI2,
       HDMI3,
       Analog,
       Internal,
       others => Disabled);

The `GMA.gfxinit()` procedure probes for display EDIDs in the
given order until all available pipes are taken. That's 1 pipe
in VGA textmode, 2 pipes in high-resolution mode until Sandy
Bridge, 3 pipes from Ivy Bridge on.
