Documentation/getting_started/writing_documentation.md, before:

# coreboot documentation guidelines

> Documentation is like sex: when it is good, it is very, very good;
> and when it is bad, it is better than nothing.

That said please always try to write documentation! One problem in the
firmware development is the missing documentation. In this document
you will get a brief introduction how to write, submit and publish
documenation to coreboot.

## Preparations

coreboot uses [Sphinx] documentation tool. We prefer the markdown format
over reStructuredText so only embedded ReST is supported. Checkout the
[Markdown Guide] for more information.

### Install Sphinx

Please follow this official [guide] to install sphinx.
You will also need python-recommonmark for sphinx to be able to handle
markdown documenation.

The recommended version is sphinx 1.7.7, sphinx_rtd_theme 0.4.1 and
recommonmark 0.4.0.

### Optional

Install [shpinx-autobuild] for rebuilding markdown/rst sources on the fly!

## Basic and simple rules

The following rules should be followed in order to get it at least reviewed
on [review.coreboot.org].

Documentation:

1.  Must be written in **markdown** with **embedded reStructuredText**
    format.
2.  Must be written in **English**.
3.  Must be placed into **Documentation/** directory subfolder.
4.  Should follow the same directory structure as **src/** when practical.
5.  Must be referenced from within other markdown files
6.  The commit must follow the [Gerrit Guidelines].
7.  Must have all **lowercase filenames**.
8.  Running text should have a visible width of about **72 chars**.
9.  Should not **duplicate** documentation, but reference it instead.
10.  Must not include the same picture in multiple markdown files.
11.  Images should be kept small. They should be under 700px in width, as
     the current theme doesn't allow bigger images.
12.  Shouldn't cover implementation details; for details, the code is the
     reference.

## Referencing markdown documents

Starting with Sphinx 1.6 recommonmark's *auto_doc_ref* feature is broken.
To reference documents use the TOC tree or inline RST code.

## Markdown and Tables

Under Sphinx markdown tables are not supported. Therefore you can use following
code block to write tables in reStructuredText and embed them into the markdown:

    ```eval_rst
    +------------+------------+-----------+
    | Header 1   | Header 2   | Header 3  |
    +============+============+===========+
    | body row 1 | column 2   | column 3  |
    +------------+------------+-----------+
    | body row 2 | Cells may span columns.|
    +------------+------------+-----------+
    | body row 3 | Cells may  | - Cells   |
    +------------+ span rows. | - contain |
    | body row 4 |            | - blocks. |
    +------------+------------+-----------+
    ``` #just a code block is enough

[coreboot]: https://coreboot.org
[Documentation]: https://review.coreboot.org/cgit/coreboot.git/tree/Documentation
[shpinx-autobuild]: https://github.com/GaretJax/sphinx-autobuild
[guide]: http://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/stable/install.html
[Sphinx]: http://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/
[Markdown Guide]: https://www.markdownguide.org/
[Gerrit Guidelines]: https://doc.coreboot.org/gerrit_guidelines.html
[review.coreboot.org]: https://review.coreboot.org

Commit message:

UPSTREAM: Documentation: Describe recommonmark's auto_toc_tree
Explain recommonmark's auto_toc_tree and give an example to make writing
documentation easier. Show an example what happens if the document
isn't included in any toctree.

BUG=none
BRANCH=none
TEST=none

Change-Id: If051af22995b9eb2c4f8f069fdb9b96da22168b7
Signed-off-by: Martin Roth <martinroth@chromium.org>
Original-Commit-Id: 3d1d966dd8866e8fd399f988b38b7ceba9f4cfee
Original-Change-Id: I4938d8d292ea890caec6d396b4fa04da65e398f4
Original-Signed-off-by: Patrick Rudolph <patrick.rudolph@9elements.com>
Original-Reviewed-on: https://review.coreboot.org/28427
Original-Tested-by: build bot (Jenkins) <no-reply@coreboot.org>
Original-Reviewed-by: Tom Hiller <thrilleratplay@gmail.com>
Original-Reviewed-by: Philipp Deppenwiese <zaolin.daisuki@gmail.com>
Reviewed-on: https://chromium-review.googlesource.com/1254786

Documentation/getting_started/writing_documentation.md, after:

# coreboot documentation guidelines

> Documentation is like sex: when it is good, it is very, very good;
> and when it is bad, it is better than nothing.

That said please always try to write documentation! One problem in the
firmware development is the missing documentation. In this document
you will get a brief introduction how to write, submit and publish
documenation to coreboot.

## Preparations

coreboot uses [Sphinx] documentation tool. We prefer the markdown format
over reStructuredText so only embedded ReST is supported. Checkout the
[Markdown Guide] for more information.

### Install Sphinx

Please follow this official [guide] to install sphinx.
You will also need python-recommonmark for sphinx to be able to handle
markdown documenation.

The recommended version is sphinx 1.7.7, sphinx_rtd_theme 0.4.1 and
recommonmark 0.4.0.

### Optional

Install [shpinx-autobuild] for rebuilding markdown/rst sources on the fly!

## Basic and simple rules

The following rules should be followed in order to get it at least reviewed
on [review.coreboot.org].

Documentation:

1.  Must be written in **markdown** with **embedded reStructuredText**
    format.
2.  Must be written in **English**.
3.  Must be placed into **Documentation/** directory subfolder.
4.  Should follow the same directory structure as **src/** when practical.
5.  Must be referenced from within other markdown files
6.  The commit must follow the [Gerrit Guidelines].
7.  Must have all **lowercase filenames**.
8.  Running text should have a visible width of about **72 chars**.
9.  Should not **duplicate** documentation, but reference it instead.
10.  Must not include the same picture in multiple markdown files.
11.  Images should be kept small. They should be under 700px in width, as
     the current theme doesn't allow bigger images.
12.  Shouldn't cover implementation details; for details, the code is the
     reference.

## Referencing markdown documents

Starting with Sphinx 1.6 recommonmark's *auto_doc_ref* feature is broken.
To reference documents use the TOC tree or inline RST code.

## Markdown and Tables

Under Sphinx markdown tables are not supported. Therefore you can use following
code block to write tables in reStructuredText and embed them into the markdown:

    ```eval_rst
    +------------+------------+-----------+
    | Header 1   | Header 2   | Header 3  |
    +============+============+===========+
    | body row 1 | column 2   | column 3  |
    +------------+------------+-----------+
    | body row 2 | Cells may span columns.|
    +------------+------------+-----------+
    | body row 3 | Cells may  | - Cells   |
    +------------+ span rows. | - contain |
    | body row 4 |            | - blocks. |
    +------------+------------+-----------+
    ``` #just a code block is enough

## TocTree

To make sure that all documents are included into the final documentation, you
must reference each document from at least one *toctree*. The *toctree* must
only reference files in the same folder or in subfolders !
To create a toctree, simply use a bullet list or numbered list with a single
reference. References in regular text aren't considered as *toctree* .
This feature is enabled by recommonmark's *enable_auto_toc_tree* .

**Example toctree:**

```
* [Chapter 1](chapter1.md)
* [Chapter 2](chapter2.md)
* [Subchapter](sub/index.md)
```

```
1. [Chapter 1](chapter1.md)
2. [Chapter 2](chapter2.md)
```

If you do only reference the document, but do not include it in any toctree,
you'll see the following warning:
**WARNING: document isn't included in any toctree**

[coreboot]: https://coreboot.org
[Documentation]: https://review.coreboot.org/cgit/coreboot.git/tree/Documentation
[shpinx-autobuild]: https://github.com/GaretJax/sphinx-autobuild
[guide]: http://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/stable/install.html
[Sphinx]: http://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/
[Markdown Guide]: https://www.markdownguide.org/
[Gerrit Guidelines]: https://doc.coreboot.org/gerrit_guidelines.html
[review.coreboot.org]: https://review.coreboot.org
